#Harvesting spiny lobsters depletes and destabilizes hotspots of recycled ammonium

##Authors of analysis and code: Joey Peters, Bart DiFiore

##Description:
Data, code, and analyses performed in R for the purposes of testing the effects of fishing on hotspots of ammonium generated by aggregations of the California Spiny Lobster. 

##Abstract:
Consumer aggregations form nutrient hotspots that can influence the distribution of producers but are vulnerable to human drivers like overharvesting. By concentrating essential nutrients like nitrogen or phosphorous for extended periods, aggregations can structure communities from the “bottom-up.” Ammonium, a form of nitrogen recycled by consumers can be particularly important for production in marine systems where nitrate availability is often limited from seasons to years. However, many marine aggregations are also extracted by fisheries that could deplete or destabilize otherwise consistent sources of ammonium. Harvest effectively removes nutrients from the ecosystem entirely, yet hardly any studies have quantified the direct impacts on consumer-mediated nutrient dynamics (CND) over multiple spatiotemporal scales. To provide some context, we conducted a study on the heavily fished California spiny lobster (Panulirus interruptus, Randall 1840), which excrete significant quantities of ammonium and regularly aggregate near reef shelters for several hours each day, giving them the potential to form nutrient hotspots. We assessed the impact froms fishing by comparing unfished lobster populations within reserve boundaries with adjacent fished populations over a three-month period that encompassed the transition from closed to open fishing season. We paired lobster census data with measurements of their ammonium excretion to estimate the magnitdue and stability of hotspots from changes in densities over time. We also compared the cover of  benthic macroalgae on reefs with hotspots to those without. Hotspots generated 144% more ammonium and had 83% higher cover of filamentous turfs than plots lacking aggregations which were dominated by foliose brown macroalgae. However, fishing reduced ammonium excretions by 71% and their stability by 51% within only one month of season opening. Meanwhile, lobsters aggregations in reserves underwent no significant change. Moreover, ammonium excretions were 3-fold greater in reserves at the beginning of the study, suggesting protection may allow hotspots over the long term. Thus, harvest can very rapidly deplete nutrient availability and persistent take can fundamentally diminish CND in ecosystems over time. 

##Scripts:
**lobster_project_N_excretion.R:** R script used to develop allometric relationship for ammonium (NH4) excretion based on lobster carapace-free dry mass from 119 lobsters collected at our study sites.  Estimates per capta NH4 excretion of lobsters censused in plots on Catalina Island. 

**lobster_project_data.R:** R script to process lobster and benthic data into datasets used in subsequent analyses

**lobster_hotspots_maps.R:** R script to generate heatmaps of NH4 around lobster shelters utilizing NH4 data collected from lobster excretion and ambient water column samples

**lobster_project_analysis.R:** R script that analyzes datasets, performs model testing, ang creates figures and summary tables for manuscript
